C++ for OpenCL 2021 (i.e OpenCL 3.0-compatible) (#616)
KhronosGroup/OpenCL-Docs: cxx4opencl/address_spaces.txt

// Copyright 2019-2021 The Khronos Group. This work is licensed under a
// Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License; see
// http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/

[[address_space]]
=== Address spaces

{cpp} for OpenCL inherits address space behavior from `OpenCL C 3.0 s6.7`.

> This section only documents behavior related to {cpp} features. For example
> conversion rules are extended from the qualification conversion {cpp}17

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This section only documents behavior related to {cpp} features. For example,
conversion rules are extended from the qualification conversion in {cpp}17
```

`[conv.qual]` but the compatibility is determined using notation of sets and
overlapping of address spaces from `section 5.1.3` of <<embedded-c-spec,
The Embedded C Specification>>. For OpenCL kernel languages there are two

> main semantics depending on whether generic address space (`OpenCL C 3.0 6.7.`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
main semantics depending on whether generic address space (`OpenCL C 3.0 6.7.5`)
```

is supported on not. The generic address space is always supported for

 * {cpp} for OpenCL 1.0;
 * {cpp} for OpenCL 2021 with the presence of `+__opencl_c_generic_address_space+`
   feature as explained in `OpenCL C 3.0 s6.2.1`.

> If generic address space is not supported qualification conversions with pointer
> type where address spaces differ are not allowed. If generic address space is
> supported implicit conversions are allowed from a named address space (except for
> `+__constant+`) to generic address space. The reverse conversion is only allowed
> explicitly. The `+__constant+` address space does not overlap with any other and
> therefore no valid conversion between `+__constant+` and any other address space

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If generic address space is not supported, qualification conversions with pointer
type where address spaces differ are not allowed. If generic address space is
supported, implicit conversions are allowed from a named address space (except for
`+__constant+`) to generic address space. The reverse conversion is only allowed
explicitly. The `+__constant+` address space does not overlap with any other,
therefore, no valid conversion between `+__constant+` and any other address space
```

exists. This is aligned with rules from `OpenCL C 3.0 s6.7.9` and this logic
regulates semantics described in this section.

==== Casts

C-style casts follow rules of `OpenCL C 3.0 s6.7.9`. Conversions of
references and pointers to the generic address space can be done by any {cpp} cast
operator (as an implicit conversion); converting from generic to named address
space can only be done using the dedicated `addrspace_cast` operator. The
`addrspace_cast` operator can only convert between address spaces for pointers and
references and no other conversions are allowed to occur. Note that conversions
between `__constant` and any other other address space are disallowed.

[source,cpp]
------------
// Example assumes generic address space support.
int * genptr; // points to generic address space.

> // named -> generic address space conversions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// generic -> named address space conversions.
```

__private float * ptrfloat = reinterpret_cast<__private float*>(genptr); // illegal.
__private float * ptrfloat = addrspace_cast<__private float*>(genptr); // illegal.
__private int * ptr = addrspace_cast<__private int*>(genptr); // legal.

> // generic -> named address space conversion.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// named -> generic address space conversion.
```

float * genptrfloat = reinterpret_cast<float*>(ptr); // legal.

// disjoint address space conversion.
__constant int * constptr = addrspace_cast<__constant int*>(genptr); // illegal.
------------

> If generic address space is not supported any conversion of references/pointers

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If generic address space is not supported, any conversion of references/pointers
```

pointing to different address spaces is illegal.

[source,cpp]
------------
// Example without generic address space support.
int * privptr; // points to private address space.

// The same address space conversions.
__private float * ptrfloat = reinterpret_cast<__private float*>(privptr); // legal.
__private float * ptrfloat = addrspace_cast<__private float*>(privptr); // illegal.

> __private int * ptr = addrspace_cast<__private int*>(genptr); // legal, no op.
> float * genptrfloat = reinterpret_cast<float*>(ptr); // legal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
__private int * ptr = addrspace_cast<__private int*>(privptr); // legal, no op.
float * privptrfloat = reinterpret_cast<float*>(ptr); // legal.
```

// disjoint address space conversion.
__constant int * constptr = addrspace_cast<__constant int*>(privptr); // illegal.
------------

[[references]]
==== References

Reference types can be qualified with an address space.

[source,cpp]
------------
__private int & ref = ...; // references int in __private address space.
------------

By default references refer to generic address space objects if generic
address space is supported or private address space otherwise, except
for dependent types that are not template specializations (see
<<addrspace-deduction, _Deduction_>>).

[source,cpp]
------------
int & ref = ...; // references int in generic address space if it is
                 // supported otherwise in __private address space.
------------

Address space compatibility checks are performed when references are
bound to values. The logic follows the rules from address space pointer

> conversion (`OpenCL 3.0 s6.7.9`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
conversion (`OpenCL C 3.0 s6.7.9`).
```

[source,cpp]
------------
void f(float &ref, __global float &globref) {
  const int& tmp = ref; // legal - reference to generic/__private address space object can
                        // bind to a temporary object created in __private  address space.

  __global const int& globtmp = globref; // error reference to global address space object cannot bind
                                         // to a temporary object created in __private  address space.
}
------------

[[addrspace-deduction]]
====  Address space inference

This section details what happens if address spaces for types are not
provided in the source code explicitly. Most of the logic for address space

> inference (i.e. default address space) follows rules from `OpenCL 3.0 s6.7.8`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
inference (i.e. default address space) follows rules from `OpenCL C 3.0 s6.7.8`.
```

References inherit rules from pointers and therefore refer to generic
address space objects by default (see <<references, _References_>>) if
generic address space is supported, otherwise they refer to private
address space objects.

Class static data members are deduced to `+__global+` address space. Note,

> that if implementations of {cpp} for OpenCL 2021 does not support program
> scope variables (i.e. `+__opencl_c_program_scope_global_variables+` feature
> from `OpenCL 3.0 s6.1`) the address space qualifier must be  specified

Reviewer: ```suggestion
that if implementation of {cpp} for OpenCL 2021 does not support program
scope variables (i.e. `+__opencl_c_program_scope_global_variables+` feature
from `OpenCL C 3.0 s6.1`) the address space qualifier must be  specified
```

> that if implementation of {cpp} for OpenCL 2021 does not support program

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
that if the {cpp} for OpenCL 2021 implementation does not support program
```

> from `OpenCL C 3.0 s6.1`) the address space qualifier must be  specified

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
from `OpenCL C 3.0 s6.1` is disabled) the address space qualifier must be specified
```

Author: I would like to avoid using "disabled" as this can be confused with pragma enabling/disabling mechanism for extensions. How about:
```suggestion
from `OpenCL C 3.0 s6.1` is unsupported) the address space qualifier must be specified
```

Reviewer 2: Unsupported is indeed better!

> explicitly and it must be `+__constant+` address space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
explicitly and it must be the `+__constant+` address space.
```

All non-static member functions take an implicit object parameter `this`
that is a pointer type. By default the `this` pointer parameter is in the
generic address space if it is supported and in the private address space
otherwise. All concrete objects passed as an argument to the
implicit `this` parameter will be converted to this default (generic or private)

> address space first if such conversion is valid. Therefore programs using objects
> in disjoint address spaces will not be compiled unless the address for the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
address space first if such conversion is valid. Therefore, programs using objects
in disjoint address spaces will not be compiled unless the address spaces for the
```

object parameter `this` is explicitly specified using address space qualifiers
on member functions (see <<addrspace-member-function-qualifiers,
_Member function qualifier_>>). For example, use of member functions with
objects in `+__constant+` address space will always require a `+__constant+`

> member function qualifier as `__constant` address space is disjoint with any

Reviewer 2: Mixed use of `+__constant+` vs `__constant`

Author: uff we need `+__constant+` otherwise asciidoc does something dodgy with __ occasionally...
```suggestion
member function qualifier as `+__constant+` address space is disjoint with any
```

Reviewer 2: Probably worth checking the rest of your patch for the following then:
```
`__
```

other.

Member function qualifiers can also be used in case address space conversions
are undesirable for example for performance reasons. For example, a method can
be implemented to exploit memory access coalescing for segments with memory bank.

Address spaces are not deduced for:

  * non-pointer/non-reference template parameters except for template
    specializations or non-type type based template parameters.
  * non-pointer/non-reference class members except for static data members

>     that are deduced to `+__global+` address space for {cpp} for OpenCL v1.0

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    that are deduced to `+__global+` address space for {cpp} for OpenCL 1.0
```

>     that are deduced to `+__global+` address space for {cpp} for OpenCL 1.0

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    that are deduced to the `+__global+` address space for {cpp} for OpenCL 1.0
```

>     or {cpp} for OpenCL 2021 with `__opencl_c_program_scope_global_variables`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    or {cpp} for OpenCL 2021 with the `__opencl_c_program_scope_global_variables`
```

    feature.
  * non-pointer/non-reference type alias declarations.
  * decltype expressions.

[source,cpp]
------------
template <typename T>
void foo() {
  T m; // address space of 'm' will be known at template instantiation time.
  T * ptr; // 'ptr' points to generic address space object when it is
           // supported otherwise to __private address space.
  T & ref = ...; // 'ref' references an object in generic address space when
                 // it is supported otherwise in __private address space.
};

template <int N>
struct S {
  int i; // 'i' has no address space.
  static int ii; // 'ii' is in global address space if program scope variables

>                  // are supported otherwise this statement is not legal.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                 // are supported; otherwise this statement is not legal.
```

>   int * ptr; // 'ptr' points to int in generic address space if it is supported

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  int * ptr; // 'ptr' points to int in generic address space if it is supported;
```

             // otherwise to __private address space.
  int & ref = ...; // 'ref' references int in generic address space if it is

>                    // supported otherwise in __private address space.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                   // supported; otherwise in __private address space.
```

};

template <int N>
void bar()
{
  S<N> s; // 's' is in __private address space.
}
------------

[source,cpp]
------------
struct c1 {};
using alias_c1 = c1; // 'alias_c1' is 'c1'.

> using alias_c1_ptr = c1 *; // 'alias_c1_ptr' is a generic address space pointer to 'c1'
>                            // when generic address space is supported otherwise it
>                            // points to 'c1' located in __private address space.
> ------------

Reviewer: When compiled to PDF, line 192 exceeds length limit and gets moved to a new line
```suggestion
using alias_c1_ptr = c1 *; // 'alias_c1_ptr' is a generic address space pointer to
                           // 'c1' when generic address space is supported otherwise
                           // it points to 'c1' located in __private address space.
------------
```

>                            // 'c1' when generic address space is supported otherwise

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                           // 'c1' when generic address space is supported; otherwise
```

[source,cpp]
------------
__kernel void foo()
{
  __local int i;
  decltype(i)* ii; // type of 'ii' is '__local int *__private'.
}
------------

For the placeholder type specifier `auto` an address space of the outer type is

> deduced as if it would be any other regular type. However if `auto` is used in a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deduced as if it was any other regular type. However, if `auto` is used in a
```

from `OpenCL 3.0 s6.1`) the address space qualifier must be  specified
explicitly and it must be `+__constant+` address space.

All non-static member functions take an implicit object parameter `this`
that is a pointer type. By default the `this` pointer parameter is in the
generic address space if it is supported and in the private address space
otherwise. All concrete objects passed as an argument to the
implicit `this` parameter will be converted to this default (generic or private)
address space first if such conversion is valid. Therefore programs using objects
in disjoint address spaces will not be compiled unless the address for the
object parameter `this` is explicitly specified using address space qualifiers
on member functions (see <<addrspace-member-function-qualifiers,
_Member function qualifier_>>). For example, use of member functions with
objects in `+__constant+` address space will always require a `+__constant+`
member function qualifier as `__constant` address space is disjoint with any
other.

Member function qualifiers can also be used in case address space conversions
are undesirable for example for performance reasons. For example, a method can

> be implemented to exploit memory access coalescing for segments with memory bank.

Reviewer 3: At this stage, the reader might wonder how this qualification is done in practice. Since there are some examples below, you could add "see examples below" or refer explicitly to a section with such examples.

Author: Although we refer to the section that explains the feature along with examples

> (see <<addrspace-member-function-qualifiers,
> _Member function qualifier_>>)

Address spaces are not deduced for:

  * non-pointer/non-reference template parameters except for template
    specializations or non-type type based template parameters.
  * non-pointer/non-reference class members except for static data members
    that are deduced to `+__global+` address space for {cpp} for OpenCL v1.0
    or {cpp} for OpenCL v1.1 with `__opencl_c_program_scope_global_variables`
    feature.
  * non-pointer/non-reference type alias declarations.
  * decltype expressions.

[source,cpp]
------------
template <typename T>
void foo() {
  T m; // address space of 'm' will be known at template instantiation time.
  T * ptr; // 'ptr' points to generic address space object when it is

>            // supported other to __private address space.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
           // supported otherwise to __private address space.
```

`volatile` qualifiers.

[source,cpp]
------------

> // Assumes that generic address space is supported.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
// This example assumes that generic address space is supported.
```

diagnostic.

[source,cpp]
------------
struct C {
  C() __local {};
  C() __private {};
  constexpr C() __constant {};

  void foo() __local;
  void foo(); // This is implicitly qualified by generic address space
              // if it is supported otherwise by '__private'.
};

__kernel void bar() {
  __local C c1;      // will resolve to the first constructor overload.
  __private C c2;    // will resolve to the second constructor overload.
  __constant C c3{}; // will resolve to the third constructor overload.
  c1.foo(); // will resolve to the first 'foo'.
  c2.foo(); // will resolve to the second 'foo'.
  c3.foo(); // error due to mismatching address spaces - can't convert to
            // '__local' or generic/'__private' address spaces.
}
------------

> All  member functions can be qualified by an address space qualifier including

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All member functions can be qualified by an address space qualifier including
```

  c1.foo(); // will resolve to the first 'foo'.
  c2.foo(); // will resolve to the second 'foo'.
  c3.foo(); // error due to mismatching address spaces - can't convert to

>             // '__local' or generic/'__private' addr spaces.

Reviewer 3: It may be the only place where you use the contracted form "addr".
```suggestion
            // '__local' or generic/'__private' address spaces.
```

}
------------

All  member functions can be qualified by an address space qualifier including

> constructors and destructors.

Reviewer 3: It might be good for explicitness to have an example with a constructor. (There's an example under Construction, initialization and destruction but it's much later in this document.)

          /* object in generic address space if supported */
          /* in private address space otherwise. */

  // C(const C & par); /* 'this'/'par' is a pointer/reference to */
                       /*  object in generic address space */
                       /*  if supported */
                       /* in private address space otherwise. */

  // C(C && par); /* 'this'/'par' is a pointer/r-val reference to */
                  /* object in generic address space if supported */
                  /* in private address space otherwise. */

  // C & operator=(const C & par); /* 'this'/'par'/return value is */
                                   /* a pointer/reference/reference to */
                                   /* object in generic address space */
                                   /* if supported */ 
                                   /* in private address space otherwise. */

  // C & operator=(C && par)'; /* 'this'/'par'/return value is */
                               /* a pointer/r-val reference/reference to */
                               /* object in generic address space. */
                               /* if supported */ 

>                                /* in private address space otherwise. */

Reviewer 3: Given all this are comments anyway, it would be more readable to use the full line. For example:
```cpp
  // C(); /* implicit 'this' parameter is a pointer to */
          /* object in generic address space if supported */
          /* in private address space otherwise. */
```
would be
```cpp
  // C();
  // implicit 'this' parameter is a pointer to object in generic address space 
  // if supported in private address space otherwise.
```

Author: In this document, we break them up because they didn't get visualized properly in the PDF.

However, if we are to do this perhaps it has to be done everywhere? And then it might be better to create separate PR?

Author: I have built the pdf and checked and indeed long lines are not displayed nicely in the code examples... so for the time being we need to continue handling the line breaks manually... until we find some automatic solution.... They do look fine in XML because there is a scroll bar in the browsers.

  [&] () __global {} (); // error: lambda temporary is in __private address space.

  [&] () mutable __private {} ();
  [&] () __private mutable {} (); // error: mutable specifier should precede address
                                  // space.
}
------------

==== Implicit special members

The prototype for implicit special members (default, copy or move constructor,
copy or move assignment, destructor) has the default address space for an implicit
object pointer and reference parameters (see also
<<addrspace-member-function-qualifiers, _Member function qualifier_>>). This default
address space is generic if it is supported or private otherwise.

[source,cpp]
------------
class C {
  // Has the following implicitly defined member functions.

  // C(); /* implicit 'this' parameter is a pointer to */

>           /* object in generic address space if supported */

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
          /* object in generic address space if supported, or */
```

Please apply this change to the lines below too.

          /* in private address space otherwise. */

  // C(const C & par); /* 'this'/'par' is a pointer/reference to */
                       /*  object in generic address space */
                       /*  if supported */
                       /* in private address space otherwise. */

  // C(C && par); /* 'this'/'par' is a pointer/r-val reference to */
                  /* object in generic address space if supported */
                  /* in private address space otherwise. */

  // C & operator=(const C & par); /* 'this'/'par'/return value is */
                                   /* a pointer/reference/reference to */
                                   /* object in generic address space */
                                   /* if supported */ 
                                   /* in private address space otherwise. */

  // C & operator=(C && par)'; /* 'this'/'par'/return value is */
                               /* a pointer/r-val reference/reference to */

>                                /* object in generic address space. */

Author: ```suggestion
                               /* object in generic address space, */
```

>                                /* if supported */ 

Reviewer 2: The sentence ends on the previous line, so this sentence by itself doesn't make much sense.

Author: ```suggestion
                               /* if it is supported or */ 
```

Author: Agree, I am suggesting changing that and also adding a comma in the previous line.

                               /* in private address space otherwise. */
};
------------

> `TODO: As an optimisation we can do an upgrade in this version and always infer

Reviewer 2: Is this TODO meant to stay and be published?

Author: No I am going to remove this since we didn't have time to implement this in clang yet.

the concrete address space! See "Builtin operators" for details. Needs
confirmation that code size doesn't increase significantly.`

==== Builtin operators

All builtin operators are available in the specific named address spaces, thus
no address space conversions (i.e. to generic address space) are performed.

> `TODO: Why are assignment operators different? See "Implicit special members".`

Reviewer 2: Is this TODO meant to stay and be published?

Author: This can be resolved now because in C++17 [over.built] p1 it states:

> Because built-in operators take only operands with
non-class type, ...

From which there seems to be no ambiguity between member assignments and built-in assignment operators as they are classified in different categories.

  [&] () mutable __private {} ();

>   [&] () __private mutable {} (); // error: mutable specifier should precede address space.

Reviewer: Exceeds line length when compiled into PDF
```suggestion
  [&] () __private mutable {} (); // error: mutable specifier should precede address
                                  // space.
```

instantiation.

[source,cpp]
------------
1  template<typename T>
2  void foo(T* i){
3   T var;
4  }
5 
6  __global int g;
7  void bar(){
8    foo(&g); // error: template instantiation failed as function scope variable 'var'
9             // appears to be declared in __global address space (see line 3).

> 10 }

Reviewer 3: Unless they are explicitly referred to, I'd remove the line numbers.

Author: we do in the comment on line 9
>// appears to be declared in __global address space (see line 3).

instantiation.

[source,cpp]
------------
1  template<typename T>
2  void foo(T* i){

> 3   T var;

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3    T var;
```

------------
class C {
  int m;
// If generic address space is not supported or for performance optimization
// purposes the following members might be required.
public:
  __local C & operator=(const C & par) __local;
  ~C() __local;
};
__kernel void foo() {
  __local C locobj{}; // error: local address space objects can't be initialized
  __local C locobj; // uninitialised object
  locobj = {}; // calling copy assignment operator is allowed

>   locobj.~C(); // local address space object destructors are not invoked automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  locobj.~C(); // local address space object destructors are not invoked
               // automatically.
```

------------
class C {
  int m;
// If generic address space is not supported or for performance optimization
// purposes the following members might be required.
public:
  __local C & operator=(const C & par) __local;
  ~C() __local;
};
__kernel void foo() {
  __local C locobj{}; // error: local address space objects can't be initialized
  __local C locobj; // uninitialised object
  locobj = {}; // calling copy assignment operator is allowed
  locobj.~C(); // local address space object destructors are not invoked
               // automatically.
}
------------

> User defined constructors are not allowed to construct objects in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
User defined constructors are not allowed to construct objects in the
```
